HIPAA Compliance
----------------
Last update: March 15, 2007

The HIPAA Security Standards [http://www.cms.hhs.gov/SecurityStandard/] impose
certain requirements on EMR software.  eleMental Clinic strives to be a good
citizen in a HIPPA-compliant system.  Please read the SECURITY document in this
package for recommended configuration.

Here are the requirements as we understand them, and our implementation:

HIPAA 164.308 Administrative safeguards
---------------------------------------

164.308(a)(5)(ii)(C): (C) Log-in monitoring (Addressable).  Procedures for
    monitoring log-in attempts and reporting discrepancies. 

    - Fulfilled.  All user login/logout behavior is logged.  Failed login
      attempts are also recorded.


164.308(a)(5)(ii)(D): (D) Password management (Addressable). Procedures for
    creating, changing, and safeguarding passwords. 

    - Fulfilled.  All passwords are stored using one-way encryption, never as
      plain text.  Users are able to change their own passwords in the
      application.


HIPAA 164.312 Technical safeguards
----------------------------------

164.312(a)(2)(i): Unique user identification (Required). Assign a unique
    name and/ or number for identifying and tracking user identity. 

    - Fulfilled.  Every user has a unique login.


164.312(a)(2)(ii): Emergency access procedure (Required). Establish (and
    implement as needed) procedures for obtaining necessary electronic
    protected health information during an emergency. 

    - We believe this to be a requirement for the administration of the
      application, not the application itself.


164.312(a)(2)(iii): Automatic logoff (Addressable).  Implement electronic
    procedures that terminate an electronic session after a predetermined
    time of inactivity. 

    - Fulfilled.  This is the default behavior.  In the configuration file, you
      can tell the application to log users off after either a set amount of
      time or a period of inactivity.


164.312(a)(2)(iv): Encryption and decryption (Addressable). Implement a
    mechanism to encrypt and decrypt electronic protected health information. 

    - Fulfilled, when configured and run as recommended (i.e. with an encrypted
      filesystem, using HTTPS, and encrypting traffic between the database and
      application servers).


164.312(b): Standard: Audit controls.  Implement hardware, software, and/or
    procedural mechanisms that record and examine activity in information
    systems that contain or use electronic protected health information. 

    - In progress.  We have basic audit logging in place, and continue to
      expand it.  Currently all user login/logout behavior is logged.  Also,
      every access of a client record by a user is recorded.


164.312(c)(2): Mechanism to authenticate electronic protected health
    information. Implement electronic mechanisms to corroborate that
    electronic protected health information has not been altered or destroyed
    in an unauthorized manner. 

    - We believe that this would require either a parallel system to monitor
      the application, which would be hideously complex, or very fine-grained
      audit controls.  We continue to improve audit logging.


164.312(d): Standard: Person or entity authentication. Implement procedures
    to verify that a person or entity seeking access to electronic protected
    health information is the one claimed.

    - We believe that administrative checking of identity documents coupled
      with required periodic password changes fulfills this requirement.


164.312(e)(2)(i): Integrity controls (Addressable).  Implement security
    measures to ensure that electronically transmitted electronic protected
    health information is not improperly modified without detection until
    disposed of.

    - Currently we do not transmit records electronically.  We are implementing
      ECS, and will do so in a compliant manner.


164.312(e)(2)(ii): Encryption (Addressable).  Implement a mechanism to
    encrypt electronic protected health information whenever deemed
    appropriate. 

    - Fulfilled, when configured and run as recommended (i.e. with an encrypted
      filesystem, using HTTPS, and encrypting traffic between the database and
      application servers).
